I love a great mystery and I'm
fascinated by the greatest unsolved
mystery in science perhaps because it's
personal it's about who we are and I
can't help but be curious the mystery is
this what is the relationship between
your brain and your conscious
experiences such as your experience of
the taste of chocolate or the feeling of
velvet now this mystery is not new in
1868 Thomas Huxley wrote how it is that
anything so remarkable as a state of
consciousness comes about as the result
of irritating nervous tissue is just as
unaccountable as the appearance of the
genie when Aladdin rubbed his lamp now
Huxley knew that brain activity and
conscious experiences are correlated but
you didn't know why to the science of
his day it was a mystery in the years
since Huxley science has learned a lot
about brain activity but the
relationship between brain activity and
conscious experiences is still a mystery
why why we made so little progress well
some experts think that we can't solve
this problem because we lack the
necessary concepts and intelligence
we don't expect monkeys to solve
problems in quantum mechanics and as it
happens we can't expect our species to
solve this problem either well I
disagree I'm more optimistic I think
we've simply made a false assumption
once we fix it we just might solve this
problem today I'd like to tell you what
that assumption is why it's false and
how to fix it let's begin with the
question do we see reality as it is I
open my eyes and I have an experience
that I describe as a red tomato a meter
away as a result I come to believe that
in reality there's a red tomato a meter
away I then close my eyes and my
experience
changes to a gray field but is it still
the case that in reality there's a red
tomato a metre away I think so but could
I be wrong could I be misinterpreting
the nature of my perceptions we have
misinterpreted our perceptions before we
used to think the earth is flat because
it looks that way
Pythagoras discovered that we were wrong
then we thought that the earth is the
unmoving center of the universe again
because it looks that way
Copernicus and Galileo discovered again
that we were wrong
Galileo then wondered if we might be
misinterpreting our experiences in other
ways he wrote I think that tastes odors
colors and so on reside in consciousness
hence if the living creature were
removed all these qualities would be
annihilated now that's a stunning claim
could Galileo be right could we really
be misinterpreting our experiences that
badly what does modern science have to
say about this well neuroscientists tell
us that about 1/3 of the brains cortex
is engaged in vision when you simply
open your eyes and look about this room
billions of neurons and trillions of
synapses are engaged now this is a bit
surprising because to the extent that we
think about vision at all we think of it
as like a camera it just takes a picture
of objective reality as it is now there
is a part of vision that's like the
camera the eye has a lens that focuses
an image on the back of the eye where
there are 130 million photoreceptors
so the Iying is like a 130 megapixel
camera but that doesn't explain the
billions of neurons and trillions of
synapses that are engaged in vision what
are these neurons up - well
neuroscientists tell us that they're
creating in real-time all the shapes
objects colors and motions that we see
it feels like we're just taking a
snapshot of this room
it is but in fact we're constructing
everything that we see we don't
construct the whole world at once
reconstruct what we need in the moment
now there are many demonstrations that
are quite compelling that we construct
what we see I'll just show you - in this
example you see some red disks with bits
cut out of them but if I just rotate the
disks a little bit suddenly you see a 3d
cube pop out of the screen now the
screen of course is flat so the
3-dimensional cube that you're
experiencing must be your construction
in this next example you see glowing
blue bars with pretty sharp edges moving
across a field of dots in fact no dots
move all I'm doing from frame to frame
is changing the colors of dots from blue
to black or black to blue but when I do
this quickly your visual system creates
the glowing blue bars with the sharp
edges and the motion there are many more
examples but these are just two that you
construct what you see but
neuroscientists go further they say that
we reconstruct reality so when I have an
experience that I describe as a red
tomato that experience is actually an
accurate reconstruction of the
properties of a real red tomato that
would exist even if I weren't looking
now why would neuroscientists say that
we don't just construct we reconstruct
well the standard argument given is
usually an evolutionary one those of our
ancestors who saw more accurately had a
competitive advantage compared to those
who saw less accurately and therefore
they were more likely to pass on their
genes we're the offspring of those who
saw more accurately and so we can be
confident that in the normal case our
perceptions are accurate you see this in
the standard textbooks
one textbook says for example
evolutionarily speaking vision is useful
precisely because it's so accurate so
the idea is that accurate perceptions
are fitter perceptions they give you a
survival advantage now is this correct
is this the right interpretation of
evolutionary theory well let's first
look at a couple examples in nature the
Australian jewel beetle is dimpled
glossy and brown the female is
flightless the male flies looking of
course for a hot female when he finds
one he lights and mates there's another
species in the outback Homo sapiens the
male of the species has a massive brain
that he uses to hunt for cold beer and
when he finds one he drains it and
sometimes throws the bottle into the
outback now as it happens these bottles
are dimpled glossy and just the right
shade of brown to tickle the fancy of
these beetles the male's swarm all over
the bottles trying to mate they lose all
interest in the real females a classic
case of the male leaving the female for
the model the species almost went
extinct Australia had to change its
bottles to save its beetles now the
male's had successfully found females
for thousands perhaps millions of years
it looked like they saw reality as it is
but apparently not evolution had given
them a hat a female as anything dimpled
glossy and brown the bigger the better
even when crawling all over the bottle
the mail couldn't discover his mistake
now you might say beetles sure they're
very simple creatures but surely not
mammals mammals don't rely on tricks
well I won't dwell on this but you get
the idea so this raises an important
technical question does natural
selection really favor seeing reality as
it is fortunately we don't have to wave
our hands and guess
evolution is a mathematically precise
theory we can use the equations of
evolution to check this out we can have
various organisms artificial worlds
compete and see which survive and which
thrive which sensory systems are more
fit a key notion in those equations is
Fitness consider this steak what does
this steak do for the fitness of an
animal well for a hungry lion looking to
eat it enhances fitness for a well-fed
lion looking to mate
it doesn't enhance fitness and for a
rabbit in any state it doesn't enhance
fitness so Fitness does depend on
reality as it is yes but also on the
organism its state and its action
Fitness is not the same thing as reality
as it is and its fitness and not reality
as it is that figure centrally in the
equations of evolution so in my lab we
have run hundreds of thousands of
evolutionary game simulations with lots
of different randomly chosen worlds and
organisms that compete for resources in
those worlds some of the organisms see
all of the reality others see just part
of the reality and some see none of the
reality only Fitness who wins well I
hate to break it to you but perception
of reality goes extinct in almost every
simulation organisms that see
of reality but are just tuned to fitness
drive to extinction all the organisms
that perceive reality as it is
so the bottom line is evolution does not
favor vertical or accurate perceptions
those perceptions of reality go extinct
now this is a bit stunning how can it be
that not seeing the world accurately
gives us a survival advantage that is a
bit counterintuitive but remember the
jewel beetle the jewel beetle survived
for thousands perhaps millions of years
using simple tricks and hacks what the
equations of evolution are telling us is
that all organisms including us are in
the same boat as the jewel beetle we do
not see reality as it is
we're shaped with tricks and hacks that
keep us alive still we need some help
with our intuitions how can not
perceiving reality as it is be useful
well fortunately we have a very helpful
metaphor the desktop interface on your
computer consider that blue icon for a
TED talk that you're writing now the
icon is blue and rectangular and in the
lower right corner of the desktop does
that mean that the text file itself in
the computer is blue rectangular and in
the lower right-hand corner of the
computer of course not anyone who
thought that misinterprets the purpose
of the interface it's not there to show
you the reality of the computer in fact
it's there to hide that reality you
don't want to know about the diodes and
resistors and all the megabytes of
software if you had to deal with that
you could never write your text file or
edit your photo so the idea is that
evolution has given us an interface that
hides reality and guides adaptive
behavior space and time as you perceive
them right now or your desktop physical
objects are simply icons in that desktop
there's an obvious objection Hoffman if
you think that train coming down the
track at Twitter miles an hour is just
an eye
on your desktop why don't you step in
front of it and after you're gone and
your theory with you we'll know that
there's more to that train than just an
icon
well I wouldn't step in front of that
train for the same reason that I
wouldn't carelessly drag that icon to
the trash can
not because I take the icon literally
the file is not literally blue or
rectangular but I do take it seriously
I could lose weeks of work similarly
evolution has shaped us with perceptual
symbols that are designed to keep us
alive we better take them seriously if
you see a snake don't pick it up if you
see a cliff don't jump off they're
designed to keep us safe and we should
take them seriously that does not mean
that we should take them literally
that's a logical error another objection
now there's nothing really new here
physicists have told us for a long time
that the metal of that train looks solid
but really it's mostly empty space with
microscopic particles zipping around
there's nothing new here well not
exactly
it's like saying I know that that blue
icon on the desktop is not the reality
of the computer but if I pull out my
trusty magnifying glass and look really
closely I see little pixels and that's
the reality of the computer well not
really you're still on the desktop and
that's the point those microscopic
particles are still in space and time
they're still in the user interface so
I'm saying something far more radical
than those physicists finally you might
object look we all see the Train
therefore none of us constructs the
Train but remember this example in this
example we all see a cube but the screen
is flat so the cube that you see is the
cube that you construct we all see a
cube because we all each one of us
constructs the cube that we see the same
is true of the Train we all see a train
because we each see the Train that we
construct and the same is true of all
physical objects we're inclined to think
the perception is like a window on
reality as it is the theory of evolution
is telling us that this is an incorrect
interpretation of our perceptions
instead reality is more like a 3d
desktop that's designed to hide the
complexity of the real world and guide
adaptive behavior space as you perceive
it is your desktop physical objects are
just the icons in that desktop we used
to think that the earth is flat because
it looks that way
then we thought that the earth is the
unmoving center of reality because it
looks that way
we were wrong we had misinterpreted our
perceptions now we believe that
space-time and objects are the nature of
reality as it is the theory of evolution
is telling us that once again we're
wrong we're misinterpreting the content
of our perceptual experiences there's
something that exists when you don't
look but it's not space-time and
physical objects it is hard for us to
let go of space-time and objects as it
is for the jewel beetle to let go of its
bottle why because we're blind to our
own blindnesses but we have an advantage
over the jewel beetle our science and
technology by peering through the lens
of a telescope we discovered that the
earth is not the unmoving center a
reality by peering through the lens of
the theory of evolution we discover that
space-time and objects are not the
nature of reality when I have a
perceptual experience that I describe as
a red tomato I am interacting with
reality but that reality is not a red
tomato and is nothing like a red tomato
similarly when I have an experience that
I describe as a lion or a steak I'm
interacting with reality but that
reality is not a lion or a steak and
here's the kicker when I have a
perceptual experience that I describe as
a brain or neurons I am interacting with
reality but that reality is not a brain
or neurons and is nothing like a brain
or neurons
and that reality whatever it is is the
real source of cause and effect in the
world not brains not neurons brains and
neurons have no causal powers they cause
none of our perceptual experiences and
none of our behavior brains and neurons
are a species specific set of symbols a
hack what does this mean for the mystery
of consciousness well it opens up new
possibilities for instance perhaps
reality is some vast machine that causes
our conscious experiences I doubt this
but it's worth exploring
perhaps reality is some vast interacting
network of conscious agents simple and
complex that cause each other's
conscious experiences actually this
isn't as crazy an idea as it seems and
I'm currently exploring it but but
here's the point once we let go of our
massively intuitive but massively false
assumption about the nature of reality
it opens up new ways to think about
life's greatest mystery I bet that
reality will end up turning out to be
more fascinating and unexpected than
we'd ever imagined the theory of
evolution presents us with the ultimate
dare dare to recognize that perception
is not about seeing truth it's about
having kids and by the way even this Ted
is just in your head thank you very much
okay okay if that's really you there
thank you yes so there's this so much
from this I mean first of all some
people may just be profoundly depressed
the thought that you know if evolution
does not favor reality yes I mean
doesn't that to some extent undermine
all our endeavors here all our ability
to think that we can think the truth it
possibly even including your own theory
if you go that well this does not stop
us from a successful science what we
have is one theory that turned out to be
false that perception is like reality
and reality is like our perception that
theory turns out to be false okay
throw that theory way that doesn't stop
us from now postulating all sorts of
other theories about the nature of
reality so it's actually progress to
recognize that one of our theories was
false so science continues as normal
there's no problem here so you think
it's possible but so what you're saying
I think is that you that it's possible
the evolution can still get you to
reason yes now that's a very very good
point the evolutionary game simulations
as I showed were specifically about
perception and they do show that our
perceptions have been shaped not to show
us reality as it is but that does not
mean the same thing about our logic or
mathematics and why we haven't done
these simulations but my bet is that
we'll find that there are some selection
pressures for our logic and our
mathematics to be at least in the
direction of truth I mean if you're like
me math and logic is not easy we don't
get it all right but at least the
selection pressures are not uniformly
away from true math and logic so I think
that we'll find that we have to look at
each cognitive faculty one at a time and
see what evolution does to it what's
true about perception may not be true
about math and logic I mean really what
you're proposing is a kind of modern-day
Bishop Berkeley interpretation of the
world what the consciousness causes NASA
not the other way around
well it's slightly different than
Berkeley Berkeley thought that well he
was he was a deist and he thought that
the ultimate nature of reality is is God
and so forth and I don't need to go
where Berkeley is going and and so it's
it's quite quite a bit different from
from Berkeley this is X
I call this conscious realism it's
actually a very different approach done
I could literally talk with you for
hours and I hope to do that
[Applause]